Whether you're just starting to code or
already have a bit of experience, one
question keeps coming up. What
programming languages should you learn
in 2026? You've probably seen headlines
saying AI is taking over, junior
developers are being replaced, and
companies only want seniors. Now, let's
break down what's actually happening
with real job market data, clear
direction, and a list of languages that
can help you land a job faster. In this
video, we're diving into the top
programming languages to learn in 2026,
especially if you're a junior developer
or someone trying to level up. We'll
look at what the job market is asking
for, how AI is changing the game, and
what languages are opening doors.
Now, one quick thing before we jump in.
Learning a single programming language
by itself won't magically get you a job.
Most roles expect you to know more than
one language, be familiar with a few
frameworks and tools, show problem
solving skills, and actually build
things. But all of that still starts
with the same question. What programming
languages should you learn first? And
that's exactly what we're going to
answer today. Let's start with the
elephant in the room. Are junior
developer jobs gone? The short answer is
no, but the bar has definitely gone up.
The last few years were rough. Between
mass layoffs in 2022 and 2023, economic
uncertainty, and companies freezing
hiring, junior developers were hit the
hardest. A lot of people looked at the
market and thought, "That's it. Entry
level is dead." But that's not what the
data shows anymore. By the second half
of 2025, we started seeing real signs of
a rebound. According to a report by
Litecast, job listings for developers
with 0 to 3 years of experience have
gone up by 47% since October 2023.
That's a big shift. In the US alone,
there are currently around 24,000 open
entry-level software engineering
positions listed on indeed.com. And that
number doesn't even include internships
or startups hiring outside the big job
boards. Globally, the picture is even
more interesting. Europe, for example,
is facing a serious tech talent
shortage. About 57% of companies report
that they cannot find enough qualified
developers, and the EU needs nearly 10
million more tech workers by 2030. So,
yes, companies are hiring, but here's a
catch. They're not hiring juniors the
way they used to. Most roles today
expect you to be productive much faster.
Companies assume developers are using AI
tools, which means they're not looking
for people who can just copy and paste
code without understanding what they are
building. They want developers who
understand code, can fix problems, and
can make good decisions even with AI in
the loop. That's why fundamentals matter
more than ever. And by fundamentals, I
don't mean just syntax. I mean actually
understanding your programming language
in depth beyond quick tutorials. I mean
knowing core data structures, things
like arrays, lists, dictionaries,
stacks, cues, not in theory, but knowing
when and why to use them. You should
also know how to debug your code. You
should know your basic design patterns,
version control, databases, and the core
concepts that software engineering
students learn at universities. You
don't need a computer science degree,
but you do need that level of
understanding. Now, with that in mind,
let's talk about the programming
languages that will matter the most in
2026. Let's start with Python. Python
isn't just popular, it's everywhere.
It's used for AI, machine learning, data
analysis, backend development,
automation, and scripting. According to
the 2025 Stack Overflow developer
survey, about 58% of developers use
Python, and it grew by 7 percentage
points in a single year. That's the
largest increase of any major
programming language. On indeed.com,
there are currently over 100,000 open
Python related jobs in the US alone, and
that number is even higher globally. The
great thing about Python is that it's
easy to learn. You can start writing
useful real world code very quickly
without fighting the language. That
means you spend less time on syntax and
more time actually building things,
which is exactly what employers care
about. And if you're getting started,
you don't have to look far. I have a
full 6-hour Python tutorial right here
on this channel that's been watched by
over 46 million people. There's also a
shorter 1-hour version if you want to
give it a try. And if you want to go
deeper and master Python, I have a full
Python course for you on my website.
I've put all the links below this video.
If your goal is to break into tech,
especially working as an AI or machine
learning engineer, Python is one of the
smartest first moves you can make. Next
up is JavaScript and its powerful big
brother TypeScript. These are the
languages of the web. If you want to
build websites, dashboards, or full
products that people actually use, you
must learn JavaScript. According to the
2025 Stack Overflow developer survey,
about 66% of developers use JavaScript,
making it the most widely used language
in the world. But here's the thing. Most
professional teams today don't just use
JavaScript anymore. They use TypeScript.
Typescript builds on JavaScript by
adding types which helps catch box
earlier makes large code bases easier to
maintain and improves developer
productivity. That's why it's become the
default choice for serious production
grade web applications. In fact,
TypeScript is now used by the majority
of modern web teams and it continues to
grow faster than JavaScript itself. So,
if your goal is to build and ship
complete web products, JavaScript and
TypeScript are not optional skills.
They're foundational. And just like with
Python, I've got you covered. I have
step-by-step tutorials for JavaScript
and TypeScript right here on this
channel, watched by millions of
developers. And if you want to go
deeper, I have full courses that prepare
you for real world projects. Again, all
the links are down below. Next, we have
Java and C. These languages don't get as
much hype as Python or JavaScript, but
they power a massive part of the
software industry. Java has been around
for decades and is still everywhere.
It's often used by large companies,
financial platforms, government systems,
and high-scale enterprise applications.
And because these systems don't get
rewritten every two years, companies
need developers who can maintain and
extend them long-term. That's why Java
job demand stays consistently high. In
the US alone, there are currently over
90,000 open Java positions on indid.com.
If you're aiming for stability, backend
roles, or larger organizations, Java is
a very safe bet. C plays a very similar
role in the Microsoft ecosystem. It's
heavily used for enterprise
applications, internal tools, desktop
software, and cloud services on Azure.
It also dominates game development
through Unity, which is still one of the
most widely used game engines in the
world. Now, just like Java, C# jobs are
steady, well- paid, and less affected by
short-term trends. Now, let me be clear.
These languages do have a steeper
learning curve than Python or
JavaScript. You'll deal with stricter
typing, more structure, and more
concepts upfront. But that's also why
companies value developers who know them
well. If you're the kind of person who
enjoys structure, backend logic, and
building systems that last for years,
Java or C can be a very smart long-term
investment. Again, I have tutorials and
full courses if you're interested. Now,
let's talk about a language that almost
no one brags about, but everyone ends up
using, SQL. It's not flashy, it's not
trendy, but every serious application
runs on data, and that data lives in a
database. things like user accounts,
orders, payments, logs, analytics, and
so on. At some point, all of it touches
SQL. That's why SQL shows up in more job
postings than almost any other skill. In
the US alone, it appears in over 100,000
developer job listings, often alongside
Python, Java, JavaScript, or C#. And
here's the key point. You don't need to
be a database expert. But if you're a
developer who can read data, write
queries, and understand how databases
work, you instantly become more useful
on the job. This is especially true for
junior developers. Most beginners focus
only on their main language and ignore
data. But the moment you understand SQL,
you can go beyond dummy to-do apps. You
can build more realistic projects, debug
real problems, and actually understand
what your application is doing behind
the scenes. It's one of the highest
return on investment skills you can
learn as a developer and it pays off
immediately. Before we wrap up, let's
quickly talk about a few bonus
languages. These are languages you don't
have to learn, but in the right context,
they can be very powerful. Go or Golang
is exploding in the cloud and
infrastructure world. It's heavily used
for microservices, DevOps, and back-end
systems where performance and simplicity
matter. If you're interested in cloud
platforms, distributed systems, or
back-end infrastructure, Go is a strong
practical choice. Rust is one of the
most loved languages year after year.
It's designed for performance, safety,
and reliability, which makes it popular
in areas like systems, programming,
security, and high performance software.
It's harder to learn, but very rewarding
if that's your niche. For mobile
developers, the choices are clear. Swift
is the go-to language for iOS
development and Cotlin is the modern
standard for Android. If your goal is to
build mobile apps professionally, these
are languages that actually get you
hired. The key thing to understand here
is that these languages are goaldriven
choices. If you already know what you
want to build, like cloud systems,
low-level software, or mobile apps, they
make a lot of sense. If not, it's better
to focus on one of the core languages we
talked about earlier. So, here's the
bottom line. There's no single best
programming language, but there is a
best language for you based on the kind
of work you want to do and the jobs
you're aiming for. If you're just
starting out or trying to break into
tech in 2026, the safest path looks like
this. Start with Python or JavaScript
with TypeScript. They're versatile, in
demand, and they open the most doors
early on. Once you have got one of those
down, add SQL. That combination alone
already puts you ahead of a huge number
of junior developers. From there, you
can specialize, whether that's back end,
front end, mobile, cloud, or enterprise
development. And remember, learning a
language isn't the finish line. What
actually gets you hired is being able to
build things, solve problems, and show
that you understand how software works,
not just how to follow tutorials. And
that's exactly why I created my road
maps. I've put together road maps for
various in- demand engineering roles,
back-end developer, front-end developer,
full stack, and so on. These road maps
show you exactly what skills to learn
and in what order. Each road map comes
with a downloadable PDF so you're not
guessing or jumping between random
topics. You can find all of these in the
road maps playlist right here on this
channel. If you follow a clear road map,
learning stops feeling overwhelming and
starts to feel achievable. Now, I'm
curious which language do you want to
learn after this video? Let me know in
the comments below. I actually read the
comments and it helps me decide what
tutorials and road maps to make next.
And finally, if you found this video
helpful, give it a like and subscribe
for more helpful videos.